lightning: reformat TiDB Lightning config (#20231)
pingcap/docs: tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-configuration.md

Author: Preview: https://pingcap-docsite-preview-git-preview-pi-d5e90a-oreoxmts-projects.vercel.app/tidb/dev/tidb-lightning-configuration

- Specifies the maximum number of KV pairs in one request when sending data to TiKV in physical import mode.

<!-- Example: 32768 -->

#### `send-kv-size` <span class="version-mark">New in v7.2.0</span>

- Specifies the maximum size of one request when sending data to TiKV in physical import mode.
- Default value: `"16K"`

#### `compress-kv-pairs`

- Controls whether to enable compression when sending KV pairs to TiKV in the physical import mode.
- Currently, only the Gzip compression algorithm is supported. To use this algorithm, you can fill in either `"gzip"` or `"gz"` for this parameter.
- Default value: `""`, which means the compression is not enabled.
- Value options: `""`, `"gzip"`, `"gz"`

#### `sorted-kv-dir`

- Specifies the directory of local KV sorting in the physical import mode. If the disk performance is low (such as in HDD), it is recommended to set the directory on a different disk from `data-source-dir` to improve import speed.

#### `range-concurrency`

> - Specifies the  concurrency that TiKV writes KV data in the physical import mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Specifies the concurrency that TiKV writes KV data in the physical import mode.
```

- When the network transmission speed between TiDB Lightning and TiKV exceeds 10 Gigabit, you can increase this value accordingly.

<!-- Example: `16` -->

#### `store-write-bwlimit`

- Limits the bandwidth in which TiDB Lightning writes data into each TiKV node in the physical import mode.
- Default value: `0`, which means no limit.

#### `disk-quota`

- Specifies the disk quota for local temporary files when physical import mode is used.
- When the disk quota is insufficient, TiDB Lightning stops reading source data and writing temporary files, but prioritizes writing the already sorted key-value pairs to TiKV. After TiDB Lightning deletes the local temporary files, the import process continues.
- This option takes effect only when you set the [`backend`](#backend) option to `local`.
- Default value: `MaxInt64` bytes, that is, 9223372036854775807 bytes.

#### `add-index-by-sql`

> - Specifies whether Physical Import Mode adds indexes via SQL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Specifies whether to add indexes via SQL in physical import mode.
```

- This mechanism is consistent with that of the historical versions. The benefit of adding indexes via SQL is that you can separately import data and import indexes, and import data more quickly. After the data is imported, even if the indexes fail to be added, it does not affect the consistency of the imported data.
- Default value: `false`
- Value options:
    - `false`: TiDB Lightning will encode both row data and index data into KV pairs and import them into TiKV together.

>     - `true`: TiDB Lightning adds indexes via SQL after importing the row data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - `true`: TiDB Lightning adds indexes via the `ADD INDEX` SQL statement after importing the row data.
```

- The value must be greater than or equal to `1B`. Note that if you only specify a number (for example, `16`), the unit is Byte instead of KiB.
- Default value: `"16KiB"`

#### `logical-import-batch-size` <span class="version-mark">New in v8.0.0</span>

- In Logical Import Mode, this parameter controls the size of each SQL statement executed on the downstream TiDB server.
- It specifies the expected size of the `VALUES` part of each `INSERT` or `REPLACE` statement in a single transaction.
- This parameter is not a hard limit. The actual SQL executed might be longer or shorter, depending on the actual content imported.
- Default value: `"96KiB"`, which is optimized for import speed when TiDB Lightning is the only client of the cluster.
- Due to the implementation details of TiDB Lightning, the value is capped at 96 KiB. Setting a larger value will not take effect. You can decrease this value to reduce the stress on the cluster due to large transactions.

#### `logical-import-batch-rows` <span class="version-mark">New in v8.0.0</span>

- In Logical Import Mode, this parameter controls the maximum number of rows inserted per transaction.

> - When both [`logical-import-batch-size`](#logical-import-batch-size-new-in-v800) and `logical-import-batch-rows` are specified, the parameter whose value reaches its threshold first will take effect.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- When you specify both [`logical-import-batch-size`](#logical-import-batch-size-new-in-v800) and `logical-import-batch-rows`, the parameter whose value reaches its threshold first will take effect.
```

- Default value: `"64KiB"`

#### `batch-import-ratio`

- The engine file needs to be imported sequentially. Due to parallel processing, multiple data engines will be imported at nearly the same time, and this creates a queue and wastes resources. Therefore, TiDB Lightning slightly increases the size of the first few batches to properly distribute resources.
- The scale up factor is controlled by this parameter, which expresses the ratio of duration between the "import" and "write" steps with full concurrency. This can be calculated by using the ratio (import duration/write duration) of a single table of size around 1 GiB. The exact timing can be found in the log.
- If "import" is faster, the batch size variance is smaller, and a ratio of zero means a uniform batch size.
- Range: `[0, 1)`

<!-- Example: `0.75` -->

#### `data-source-dir`

- Specifies the local source data directory or the URI of the external storage. For more information about the URI of the external storage, see [URI format](/br/backup-and-restore-storages.md#uri-format).

<!-- Example: `"/data/my_database"` -->

#### `character-set`

> - Specifies the character set of the schema files, containing `CREATE TABLE` statements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Specifies the character set of the schema files that contains the `CREATE TABLE` statements.
```

- Default value: `"auto"`
- Value options:
    - `"auto"`: automatically detects whether the schema is UTF-8 or GB-18030. An error is reported if the encoding is neither.
    - `"utf8mb4"`: the schema files must be encoded as UTF-8; otherwise, an error is reported.
    - `"gb18030"`: the schema files must be encoded as GB-18030; otherwise, an error is reported

>     - `"latin1"`:  the schema files use MySQL latin1 encoding, also known as Code Page 1252.
>     - `"binary"`:  do not try to decode the schema files

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - `"latin1"`: the schema files use MySQL latin1 encoding, also known as Code Page 1252.
    - `"binary"`: do not try to decode the schema files
```

- Default value: `"binary"`
- Value options:
    - `"binary"`: Indicates that Lightning does not convert the encoding (by default).
    - `"utf8mb4"`: Indicates that the source data file uses UTF-8 encoding.
    - `"GB18030"`: Indicates that the source data file uses the GB-18030 encoding.
    - `"GBK"`: The source data file uses GBK encoding (GBK encoding is an extension of the GB-2312 character set, also known as Code Page 936).
    - `"latin1"`: The source data file uses MySQL latin1 encoding, also known as Code Page 1252.

#### `data-invalid-char-replace`

- Specifies the replacement character in case of incompatible characters during the character set conversion of the source data file.
- This configuration must not be duplicated with field separators, quote definers, and line breaks. Changing the default value might result in potential degradation of parsing performance for the source data file.
- Default value: `"\uFFFD"`, which is the "error" Rune or Unicode replacement character in UTF-8 encoding.

#### `strict-format`

> - Specifies the input data in a [strict format](/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-data-source.md#strict-format) speeds up processing. The default value is false for safety instead of speed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Specifies the input data in a [strict format](/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-data-source.md#strict-format) to speed up processing. The default value is `false` for safety instead of speed.
```

- Default value: `false`
- Value options: `true`, `false`
- `strict-format = true` requires that:
    - In CSV, every value cannot contain literal new lines (`U+000A` and `U+000D`, or `\r` and `\n`) even when quoted, which means new lines are strictly used to separate rows.

>     - "Strict" format allows TiDB Lightning to quickly locate split positions of a large file for parallel processing. However, if the input data is not "strict", it may split a valid data in half and corrupt the result.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - The strict format allows TiDB Lightning to quickly locate split positions of a large file for parallel processing. However, if the input data is not "strict", it might split a valid data in half and corrupt the result.
```

#### `max-region-size`

- If [`strict-format`](#strict-format) is `true`, TiDB Lightning splits large CSV files into multiple chunks to process in parallel. `max-region-size` is the maximum size of each chunk after splitting.
- Default value: `"256MiB"`

#### `filter`

> - Only import tables if these wildcard rules are matched. See the corresponding section for details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Only imports tables that match these wildcard rules. 
```

<!-- Example: `['*.*', '!mysql.*', '!sys.*', '!INFORMATION_SCHEMA.*', '!PERFORMANCE_SCHEMA.*', '!METRICS_SCHEMA.*', '!INSPECTION_SCHEMA.*']` -->

### mydumper.csv

Configures how CSV files are parsed.

#### `separator`

> - Specifies the separator between fields. Must not be empty.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Specifies the separator between fields. It supports one or more characters.
```

- Default value: `','`

#### `delimiter`

- Specifies the quoting delimiter. Empty value means no quoting.
- Default value: `'"'`

#### `terminator`

- Specifies the line terminator.
- Default value: `""`, which means both `"\n"` (LF) and `"\r\n"` (CRLF) are line terminators.

#### `header`

- Controls whether the CSV files contain a header.

> - If `header` is true, TiDB Lightning treats the first row as a table header and does not import it as data.
> - If `header` is false, the first row is also imported as CSV data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If `header` is `true`, TiDB Lightning treats the first row as a table header and does not import it as data.
- If `header` is `false`, the first row is also imported as CSV data.
```

<!-- Example: `"error"` -->

#### `build-stats-concurrency`

- Sets the TiDB session variable to speed up the Checksum and Analyze operations. For more information, see [Control `ANALYZE` concurrency](/statistics.md#control-analyze-concurrency).

<!-- Example: `20` -->

#### `distsql-scan-concurrency`

- Sets the TiDB session variable to speed up the Checksum and Analyze operations. For more information, see [Control `ANALYZE` concurrency](/statistics.md#control-analyze-concurrency).
- If [`checksum-via-sql`](#checksum-via-sql) is set to `"true"`, TiDB Lightning will execute the `ADMIN CHECKSUM TABLE <table>` SQL statement to perform the Checksum operation on TiDB. In this case, the following parameters `distsql-scan-concurrency` and `checksum-table-concurrency` will not take effect.

<!-- Example: `15` -->

#### `index-serial-scan-concurrency`

- Sets the TiDB session variable to speed up the Checksum and Analyze operations. For more information, see [Control `ANALYZE` concurrency](/statistics.md#control-analyze-concurrency).

<!-- Example: `20` -->

#### `checksum-table-concurrency`

> - Sets the TiDB session variable to speed up the Checksum and Analyze operations. For more information, see [Control `ANALYZE` concurrency](/statistics.md#control-analyze-concurrency).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Sets the TiDB session variable to speed up the Checksum and `ANALYZE` operations. For more information, see [Control `ANALYZE` concurrency](/statistics.md#control-analyze-concurrency).
```

- If [`checksum-via-sql`](#checksum-via-sql) is set to `"true"`, TiDB Lightning will execute the `ADMIN CHECKSUM TABLE <table>` SQL statement to perform the Checksum operation on TiDB. In this case, the following parameters `distsql-scan-concurrency` and `checksum-table-concurrency` will not take effect.

<!-- Example: `2` -->

#### `sql-mode`

- Specifies the default SQL mode used to parse and execute the SQL statements.

<!-- Example: `"ONLY_FULL_GROUP_BY,NO_AUTO_CREATE_USER"` -->

#### `max-allowed-packet`

- Sets maximum packet size allowed for SQL connections.
- Set this to `0` to automatically fetch the `max_allowed_packet` variable from server on every connection.

<!-- Example: `67_108_864` -->

#### `tls`

- Controls whether to use TLS for SQL connections.
- Value options:
    * `""`: force TLS (same as "cluster") if [`[tidb.security]`](#tidbsecurity) section is populated, otherwise same as `"false"`
    * `"false"`: disable TLS
    * `"cluster"`: force TLS and verify the server's certificate with the CA specified in the [`[tidb.security]`](#tidbsecurity) section
    * `"skip-verify"`: force TLS but do not verify the server's certificate (insecure!)

>     * `"preferred"`: same as `"skip-verify"`, but if the server does not support TLS, fallback to unencrypted connection

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * `"preferred"`: the same as `"skip-verify"`, but if the server does not support TLS, fall back to unencrypted connection
```

### tidb.security

> - Specifies certificates and keys for TLS-enabled MySQL connections. Defaults to a copy of the [`security`](#security) section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Specifies certificates and keys for TLS-enabled MySQL connections. 
- Default value: the copy of the [`security`](#security) section.
```

#### `ca-path`

> - Specifies the public certificate of the CA. Set to empty string to disable TLS for SQL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Specifies the public certificate of the CA. Set to the empty string if you want to disable TLS for SQL.
```

<!-- Example: `"/path/to/ca.pem"` -->

#### `cert-path`

> - Specifies the public certificate of this service. Default to copy of [`security.cert-path`](#cert-path).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Specifies the public certificate of this service. 
- Default value: the copy of [`security.cert-path`](#cert-path).
```

<!-- Example: `"/path/to/lightning.pem"` -->

#### `key-path`

> - Specifies the private key of this service. Default to copy of [`security.key-path`](#key-path).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Specifies the private key of this service. 
- Default value: the copy of [`security.key-path`](#key-path).
```

<!-- Example: `"/path/to/lightning.key"` -->

### tidb.session-vars

Sets other TiDB session variables

<!-- tidb_enable_clustered_index = "OFF" -->

### post-restore

> - In the physical import mode, when data importing is complete, TiDB Lightning can automatically perform the Checksum and Analyze operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- In the physical import mode, when data importing is complete, TiDB Lightning can automatically perform the Checksum and `ANALYZE` operations.
```

- It is recommended to leave these as true in the production environment.

> - The execution order: Checksum -> Analyze.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The execution order: Checksum -> `ANALYZE`.
```

> - Note that in the logical import mode, Checksum and Analyze is not needed, and they are always skipped in the actual operation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Note that in the logical import mode, Checksum and `ANALYZE` operations are not needed, and they are always skipped in the actual operation.
```

- Default value: `MaxInt64` bytes, that is, `9223372036854775807` bytes.

#### `task-info-schema-name`

- Specifies the name of the schema or database that stores TiDB Lightning execution results.
- To disable error recording, set this to an empty string.

<!-- Example: `'lightning_task_info'` -->

#### `meta-schema-name`

- In [parallel import mode](/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-distributed-import.md), the schema name that stores the meta information for each TiDB Lightning instance in the target cluster. Configure this parameter only if parallel import is enabled.
- The value set for this parameter must be the same for each TiDB Lightning instance that participates in the same parallel import; otherwise, the correctness of the imported data cannot be ensured.
- If parallel import mode is enabled, make sure that the user used for import (for the `tidb.user` configuration) has permissions to create and access the databases corresponding to this configuration.
- TiDB Lightning removes this schema after the import is completed. So do not use any existing schema name to configure this parameter.
- Default value: `"lightning_metadata"`

### security

> - Specifies certificates and keys for TLS connections within the cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `security` section specifies certificates and keys for TLS connections within the cluster.
```

#### `not-null`

- Controls whether the CSV contains any NULL value.
- Value options:
    - `true`: all columns from CSV cannot be NULL.
    - `false`: CSV can contain NULL values.

#### `null`

- When `not-null` is `false` (that is, CSV can contain NULL), fields equal to this value will be treated as NULL.

<!-- Example: `'\N'` -->

#### `backslash-escape`

- Controls whether to interpret backslash escapes inside fields.

<!-- Example: `true` -->

#### `trim-last-separator`

- Controls whether to remove it if a line ends with a separator.

<!-- Example: `false` -->

### mydumper.files

#### `pattern`

- Expression used for parsing AWS Aurora parquet files.
- Example: `'(?i)^(?:[^/]*/)*([a-z0-9_]+)\.([a-z0-9_]+)/(?:[^/]*/)*(?:[a-z0-9\-_.]+\.(parquet))$'`

#### `schema`

- Example: `'$1'`

#### `table`

- Example: `'$2'`

#### `type`

- Example: `'$3'`

### tidb

#### `host`

- Configuration of any TiDB server from the cluster.

<!-- Example: `"172.16.31.1"` -->

#### `port`

- Example: `4000`

#### `user`

- Example: `"root"`

#### `password`

- Configure the password to connect to TiDB. The password can either be plaintext or Base64 encoded.

#### `status-port`

> - Table schema information is fetched from TiDB via this `status-port`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fetches the table schema information from TiDB.
```

<!-- Example: `20` -->

#### `checksum-table-concurrency`

- Sets the TiDB session variable to speed up the Checksum and `ANALYZE` operations. For more information, see [Control `ANALYZE` concurrency](/statistics.md#control-analyze-concurrency).
- If [`checksum-via-sql`](#checksum-via-sql) is set to `"true"`, TiDB Lightning will execute the `ADMIN CHECKSUM TABLE <table>` SQL statement to perform the Checksum operation on TiDB. In this case, the following parameters `distsql-scan-concurrency` and `checksum-table-concurrency` will not take effect.

<!-- Example: `2` -->

#### `sql-mode`

- Specifies the default SQL mode used to parse and execute the SQL statements.

<!-- Example: `"ONLY_FULL_GROUP_BY,NO_AUTO_CREATE_USER"` -->

#### `max-allowed-packet`

- Sets maximum packet size allowed for SQL connections.
- Set this to `0` to automatically fetch the `max_allowed_packet` variable from server on every connection.

<!-- Example: `67_108_864` -->

#### `tls`

- Controls whether to use TLS for SQL connections.
- Value options:

>     * `""`: force TLS (same as "cluster") if [`[tidb.security]`](#tidbsecurity) section is populated, otherwise same as `"false"`
>     * `"false"`: disable TLS
>     * `"cluster"`: force TLS and verify the server's certificate with the CA specified in the [`[tidb.security]`](#tidbsecurity) section
>     * `"skip-verify"`: force TLS but do not verify the server's certificate (insecure!)
>     * `"preferred"`: the same as `"skip-verify"`, but if the server does not support TLS, fall back to unencrypted connection

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * `""`: forces TLS (the same as "cluster") if the [`[tidb.security]`](#tidbsecurity) section is populated. Otherwise, the same as `"false"`.
    * `"false"`: disables TLS.
    * `"cluster"`: forces TLS and verifies the server's certificate with the CA specified in the [`[tidb.security]`](#tidbsecurity) section.
    * `"skip-verify"`: forces TLS but does not verify the server's certificate. Note that this setting is insecure.
    * `"preferred"`: the same as `"skip-verify"`, but if the server does not support TLS, fall back to the unencrypted connection.
```

### tidb.security

- Specifies certificates and keys for TLS-enabled MySQL connections. 
- Default value: the copy of the [`security`](#security) section.

#### `ca-path`

- Specifies the public certificate of the CA. Set to the empty string if you want to disable TLS for SQL.

<!-- Example: `"/path/to/ca.pem"` -->

#### `cert-path`

- Specifies the public certificate of this service. 
- Default value: the copy of [`security.cert-path`](#cert-path).

<!-- Example: `"/path/to/lightning.pem"` -->

#### `key-path`

- Specifies the private key of this service. 
- Default value: the copy of [`security.key-path`](#key-path).

<!-- Example: `"/path/to/lightning.key"` -->

### tidb.session-vars

> Sets other TiDB session variables

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Specifies other TiDB session variables.
```

- This parameter is not a hard limit. The actual SQL executed might be longer or shorter, depending on the actual content imported.
- Default value: `"96KiB"`, which is optimized for import speed when TiDB Lightning is the only client of the cluster.
- Due to the implementation details of TiDB Lightning, the value is capped at 96 KiB. Setting a larger value will not take effect. You can decrease this value to reduce the stress on the cluster due to large transactions.

#### `logical-import-batch-rows` <span class="version-mark">New in v8.0.0</span>

- In Logical Import Mode, this parameter controls the maximum number of rows inserted per transaction.
- When you specify both [`logical-import-batch-size`](#logical-import-batch-size-new-in-v800) and `logical-import-batch-rows`, the parameter whose value reaches its threshold first will take effect.
- You can decrease this value to reduce the stress on the cluster due to large transactions.
- Default value: `65536`

#### `logical-import-prep-stmt`

- In Logical Import Mode, this parameter controls whether to use [prepared statements](/sql-statements/sql-statement-prepare.md) and statement cache to improve performance.

> - Default value:`false`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Default value: `false`
```

    - `"optional"`: Perform admin checksum. If checksum fails, TiDB Lightning will report a WARN log but ignore any error.
    - `"off"`: Do not perform checksum.
- Checksum failure usually means import exception (data loss or inconsistency). It is recommended to always enable checksum.
- For backward compatibility, bool values `true` and `false` are also allowed for this field. `true` is equivalent to `required` and `false` is equivalent to `off`.

#### `checksum-via-sql`

- Specifies whether the `ADMIN CHECKSUM TABLE <table>` operation is executed via TiDB.
- Default value: `"false"`
- Value options:
    - `"false"`: the `ADMIN CHECKSUM TABLE <table>` command is sent to TiKV for execution via TiDB Lightning.
    - `"true"`: if you want to adjust concurrency when this value is `"true"`, you need to set the [`tidb_checksum_table_concurrency`](/system-variables.md#tidb_checksum_table_concurrency) variable in TiDB.
- It is recommended that you set this value to `"true"` to make it easier to locate the problem if checksum fails.

#### `analyze`

- Specifies whether to perform `ANALYZE TABLE <table>` for each table after checksum is done.
- Default value: `"optional"`

> - Value options:`"required"`, `"optional"`, `"off"`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Value options: `"required"`, `"optional"`, `"off"`
```
